He does not need to oomph us. He could
there's, you know, there's like 10
directors we could name who are just
kind of like making movies from from
their Barka lounger.
>> I don't think he's capable.
>> He's not capable of doing it. I'm Wesley
Morris and this is Cannonball today.
I don't even know if that note is in
John Williams score, but
the other night my boyfriend and I
watched Jaws.
We did it on my laptop in a hotel. Hold
your fire and I'm sorry, but you know,
welcome to 2026. And with seven minutes
to go, there was like there was so much
more stuff for Chief Brody to do. The
Roy Shider character, he had to
obliterate the shark.
>> Fire, you son of a
He had to reunite with Richard Drifus.
They had to pour one out for Robert
Shaw. Quinn
>> and then they had to swim ashore.
>> Will you get in on those?
>> Those seven minutes are I don't know.
They're this blast of action, but also
just really, really satisfying
resolution. As the credits faded in and
out, we were so delirious and so
satisfied. We were also just kind of
miserable that we weren't there that
summer in 1975, surrounded by this
audience that went home up the aisle,
having had themselves a proper Stephen
Spielberg experience. Terror and comedy,
surprise and guts, common sense. I
turned to my guy and said what they did
51 years ago after the screen went dark.
Let's go again. I actually got to spend
some time talking to Steven Spielberg
over the last couple of months to write
about him for the New York Times
magazine. And he's so not about being
the great Hollywood filmmaker. He's like
your friend, your friend's dad, your
uncle. He's fun and funny and so smart
and so interested in life and you the
great filmmaker part is like this
it's almost like this accident like this
this just this gift and that is part of
his genius. I mean it comes down to his
understanding of the movies and his
grasp of human emotion. What we've been
responding to for over half a century is
how deeply he knows us. He can take what
scares us, wild animals, aliens, but
also water, war, each other. He took how
our bedrooms look, how we sleep, how we
dream, and put all that into stories
that move. I mean, I wish it were
fancier than that, but he's not a fancy
director. You had a shag carpet and wood
panel walls. So his movies do too.
>> Disclosure day is his new movie, his
35th. And it's about some regular
people, just like the other movies. A TV
weather person, an encryption
specialist, a lapsed nun, and they're
trying to understand a plot that is so
much bigger than they are.
>> What's happening to me?
>> People have starved for the truth.
I'm a part of it now. I'm just sorry
they made you a part of it, too.
>> It involves aliens. That is the very
simple way to put it. Spielberg keeps
coming back to those first in Close
Encounters of the Third Kind,
then an ET
and War of the Worlds.
Spielberg keeps asking what happens when
Earth gets visitors from somewhere else.
How are we going to handle that?
>> Why would he make such a vast universe
yet save it only for us? Disclosure Day
argues that our government has never
trusted us with an answer. And as far as
I'm concerned, the aliens in this movie
are tests of our humanity. their
stand-ins for all kinds of abuse and
oppression and neglect that tends to get
carried out in our name. The movie is
complicated but simple at the same time.
It's also really truly upsetting. My
friend Eric Hines, he knows what I mean.
He's the director of film curation and
programming at the Jacob Burns Film
Center up in Pleasantville, New York.
But he and I have been talking about
Spielberg's effect on us since we worked
together at Kim's video 25 years ago. Oh
my god. And so, of course, I had to talk
to him about Disclosure Day and also
about just what Steven Spielberg means
to us like me and Eric, but also
everybody else on this planet.
>> Eric Hines, Wesley War,
>> welcome to Cannonball again. Um,
I think at this point you're just you're
my Spielbergologist.
You're my co-pilot in Stephen Spielberg.
You are you are the person in my life
who always surprises me with um how
deeply you feel all of these movies. But
what I'm actually wondering because I
don't know
when what was your first Steven Spber
movie?
>> Well, wait, sorry. What was your first
Steven Spielberg moviegoing experience
is really the way to put this? Like what
was the film you saw in a theater that
did something to you that felt different
from other movies you may have seen in a
theater?
>> Well, I mean, I saw ET opening weekend.
>> Okay. And it was momentous. It was like
one of the most memorable viewing
experiences of my life.
>> You remember it was opening weekend.
>> It was opening weekend. It was like a
Saturday morning, I want to say, and it
was pouring rain on Staten Island. And
my mom and I went and my mom took me to
see ET
>> and it was one of those things where
>> ET screams from behind the weeds and I
lost my [__]
And I thought like it was the scariest
thing I'd ever seen in my entire life.
And it's interesting because I I don't
know if we've talked about this before,
but reading your piece about you going
to CCT with with your mom.
>> And uh this idea of like, do you want to
go? Is it too scary? Do you want to go?
I remember there was being a similar
interaction where my mom was like, oh,
this is too much. and and my and my like
somehow like instinctively like I'm not
moving, you know, I'm not moving. And
that turnound like this, I've never been
so scared, but also I've never cried so
much and I've never loved a movie more
in my entire life. Like that kind of
like full spectrum 2-hour uh arc
happened and ET just kind of captured my
imagination. He captured my kind of
emotional life for years. Slept with a
stuffed ET for years. Like I was just
kind of just in that I didn't know this.
>> Yeah. Uh, but it was also because I I
but in terms of Spielberg, I I remember
wanting to see Raiders of the Lost Arc,
>> but being told I was too young for it.
That was scary. Same here.
>> And then I did see Temple of Doom
>> uh a couple years later. And that's the
most scared I've ever been in a movie.
Like I'm still I'm still disturbed by
Temple of Doom.
>> What scared you in that movie? Was it
>> I don't know. Like somebody removing
their heart with their hand.
or eating monkeys brains like children a
monkey brains.
>> These are things that for a 10-year-old
were like, I don't know, I just couldn't
handle it. Um, but you know, good ride
also. Um anyway, so like so Spielberg
kind of like dictated my entire like '8s
like amazing stories, all that stuff,
but then hook into the '9s. I was
outgrowing it and also distrusting it. I
just felt I felt kind of like used and
manipulated and like my childhood by
him.
>> Yeah. I was like really not comfortable
with my childhood because I felt like I
figured him out and he was a manipulator
and he kind of like was a puppet master
and I did not like what he did to my
emotions.
>> Oh my god. And I resisted. Gen X punk.
>> Of course.
>> Who was just like
>> you? [__] you, dad.
>> Totally. No. And I had that thing of
like seeing Schindler's List, right? And
like crying my eyes out, but also
walking out and going,
>> "What the hell?" Like, "No." Like,
"Don't do that." Like, you know, you I
don't I don't That was not I was not
sort of like uh uh I didn't I didn't
concede to that.
>> Right. That is fascinating. Eric, I did
not know you basically rejected the
father. I did. I rejected the father.
>> This is
>> for for the for the '90s.
>> It did. It never occurred to me to to
have a different relationship with
Spielberg, but I think I probably he
never gave me he never gave me a chance
to
>> um because I remember being fascinated
by going from Temple of Doom to Color
Purple.
>> Mhm. because we're talking about like a
white Jewish man
>> making a movie written by by a black
woman,
>> right,
>> about black women,
>> right?
>> And about black life,
>> and it's so interested in the
relationships.
Um, there's this great moment in The
Color Purple where Suge Avery comes,
she's introduced and she like insults
Cely out of the gate. She just, you
know, she's drunk when she gets to the
house and she just, you know,
classically Margaret Avery finds the
summons the the the drunk demon.
I had an aunt who had a drunk demon in
her and she says to Cely.
>> You show is ugly.
>> You sure is ugly. I didn't even do it as
good as Margaret Davy. But I think the
the relationship between these two
women, which is near the heart of Alice
Walker's novel, I think he doesn't get
enough credit for bringing that to PG
life.
>> Yeah.
>> In this movie,
>> I agree.
>> There is a moment at the nightclub
where, you know, Suge sings sister,
right? Sister,
you've been on my mind.
Oh, sister.
>> Sister,
you've been on my, you know, that that
that moment. Sister, we're two of a
count. Anyway, uh,
>> she's singing that right at Cely. And
the closeup, the look on that sequence
is one of the most romantic things I
have ever seen in a movie.
>> The look on Whoopi Goldberg's face as
she
I mean she like
she you know she covers her mouth,
right? because she's embarrassed by her
smile and her teeth and her her alleged
ugliness
and sober. And in song, Suge totally
redeems
the insult that she lays on Cely.
>> And oh my god.
>> Yeah. And
the closeup of Whoopy Goldberg's face in
that moment as se as as Suge is singing
to Cely
>> is like it is like the the sun just came
out
>> and it was brought out by this woman
pulling it from her. Now when Color
Purple came out in ' 85, I would have
been nine.
>> Whoopy Goldberg would have been foreign
to me. I had never heard of Oprah
Winfrey. Basically the star of that
movie to me as a nine-year-old
was Stephen Spielberg. Sure.
>> And
so I don't know he was I was I had
already sort of established this
relationship with with this person and
was willing to follow him wherever he
went. But I'm really curious about
when it seems like you may have only had
like four years of
rejecting the father. No, I think
actually for the for the most of the
'9s.
>> Okay. So, Schindler's List was what like
>> Schindler just had a complicated feeling
about because I like responded to it. I
thought it was a masterpiece, but also
like did not like how there was this
sort of manipulative element to it. Um,
and then I fully despised Amastad.
>> Um, it just felt like wrong.
>> This is too much.
>> So, that that film felt like sort of
like a blunt object. And then I also I
didn't I I struggled for the same reason
with Saving Private Ryan, which again,
masterful film. But the manipulative
element of the plot really bothered me.
So these are things I I kind of focused
on during those years was yeah fine he's
great as a master but I have an issue
with the pulling of the strings.
>> Um but then it was AI which we've talked
about. we don't have to get back into.
But the first time I saw it, I had that
same reaction to and then two years
later revisited it and thought it was
probably the most profoundly moving film
I'd ever seen in my entire life. And
brilliant because I saw in AI this kind
of awareness of these themes, awareness
of the fact that we're being told
stories and strings are being pulled.
And that kind of turned me around and
I've been turned around from that point.
So this solid decade or so where I was
just not drinking it and I was just not
trusting it. And now I've come back
around to the father as you say
>> because because we always do. We in many
cases we come around we come back to
daddy.
>> But I'm like I well so let me just sort
of um try to get us a little farther
down the road here because I want to
talk about disclosure day.
Um, and I do want to revisit this
question of
Steven Spielberg as master manipulator.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, and whether that's fair, right?
>> Um,
>> but I want to think about what this new
movie is doing because what I find
exciting about it is it's got all the
themes, right? All the ideas are here.
And I mean, you know, we can do the plot
really fast. I mean essentially it is
there is a government conspiracy
to hide the possibility that alien life
forms have been coming to this planet
for a long time.
>> Yeah.
>> And there is an a group of rogue
government agents who have tasked
themselves to expose this cover up.
>> Mhm. Yep. That's about right.
Are they people?
No.
>> But the rogue agents and some other
character, Emily Blunt character arise
and they don't quite know how they fit
into this. That becomes more of a
mystery as things go. and Joshua O'
Connor, who we start with, he's our
protagonist in so many ways because he's
the the math wiz, the sort of numbers
guy who was um kind of going rogue on
the government and is in cahoots with
some others who are doing so. And yet
over time,
>> he starts getting confused about why
things are happening, why they're
happening.
>> He thought he knew what he was doing,
>> but there's more. There's something
deeper going on um that only one other
character knows who's the Coleman
Domingo character character's name is
Hugo. Mhm.
>> Um, and he's the guy on the phone
literally calling the shots.
>> I really enjoyed this.
>> Um, I,
>> you know, it's funny because I think my
relationship with the movies
of the last 10 years at least have been
like, well, let's just see what he's
got.
Let's just see how much he wants it, how
bad he means it, how how much oomph
there is. Cuz at this point, he does not
need to oomph us. Sure,
>> he could there's, you know, there's like
10 directors we could name who are just
kind of like, you know, making movies
from from their bark lounger,
>> you know.
>> Yeah.
>> But I'm sorry, have we not met this
person?
>> I don't think he's capable.
>> He's not capable of doing it. So, this
movie has a kind of But what surprised
me about this one is it's it's it feels
angry to me. I don't know about you.
>> I don't know that it feels angry to me.
It feels in response like I think it's
it's definitely a response a reaction to
things that make him incredibly upset.
>> Okay.
>> But I don't the film to me.
>> Okay. Fine. It is there is a there's an
anger underneath it. I think it's not
driven
yes. So, you know, it also feels it's
interesting you're saying you in terms
of looking at films over the last decade
and what you know, what do you got to me
like this film and Fableman's in
particular, but also kind of a few
before then feel summational. He's aware
that he's been approaching these themes
for half a century. He's aware that he
has a filmography. He's allowing you to
sort of see them bubble up, but also
it's not just a it's not a victory tour.
It's a I've been chasing this for half a
century. Where where have I gotten? What
do I actually believe in? Where do I
want to actually take this? So, it feels
yes like a summational thing, but also
like there's an urgency to it. Like it's
it needs to amount to something and he
really wants this to amount to
something.
>> I love the way you're thinking about
this because to me I think what there's
a way that the summational functions in
this movie, right? Like you there are
many Spielbergian themes at work here.
>> Yeah. And you know, the ones that I'm
identifying kind of overlap in a lot of
ways. Um, you know, there so we're
talking about childhood. I'm thinking,
you know, these ideas of home,
>> but also
um these standins for Stephen Spielberg
himself
>> um in this film and the ways that the
major characters can be understood as
aspects of him. Um, but what I love is
that it's all really discreet. Mhm.
>> Um there is one moment in this film that
sort of brings these things to a head.
Um so you've been watching an action
film for like 90 minutes and you know
because the entire time you've been
watching Coleman Domingo on the phone
talking to these characters. Y
>> and while he's on the phone there are
people just like you know he's on the
set of something. Yeah.
>> And something is being built.
>> Yeah. And then this amazing thing
happens where
Emily Blunt's character finally, you
know,
gets to her rendevous point in the form
here of a literal house
>> and all is revealed at least in terms of
what this set is for. And what happened
to you? I'll just say what happened to
you when this with this when this
revelation I
>> I think I I mean I
>> when you see what they built
>> I I I was I was profoundly moved. It is
a moment where you're aware of this is a
film set basically and this guy is a
director of sorts. But in terms of uh so
this house that they go that they create
for Emily Blunt to revisit and to
revisit her childhood, it's a kind of
immaculately reconstructed space that
she can recognize as being her house.
But there's something about going into
this space that to me like there's
evocations of like Elliot's room and eat
tea. There is like there's there's
there's a set there that
>> the kids rooms in Close Encounters,
right?
>> But there's something about this and
having read your profile, I know that
>> Spielberg doesn't do therapy, but
there's something about this entire
sequence to me that plays as
>> therapy I'm somewhat used, you know,
familiar with EMDR. this idea of
rewiring, of kind of revisiting a place
of trauma, revisiting a place of memory
and not just getting there for the
purposes of it, but actually figuring
out a way out of the house.
>> Yes.
>> And that's kind of what happens in the
sequence where we're then transported
back to her childhood and we revisit the
moment,
>> but the movie doesn't end. Like there
has to be something that follows out of
that. And so I think you said like 90
minutes into the film we get into this
scene, but I actually feel like
everything that comes after this scene
is them or is her emerging from that.
>> Oh yes. Oh yes.
>> Literally, but also emotionally and
psychologically.
>> Yes.
>> And that's the thing that to me is so
profound about this film and why it
works for me is that yes, all this is
all this is a construct. All this is a
story. All the strings are being pulled
and then it's like, "And now what?"
>> Yeah.
>> What are you going to do with it?
>> I don't know. I just I just want to sit
in the moment where we see this house
because it because what it says to me is
like, "Oh, he knows he knows he knows
everything about like what he's about."
>> Yeah. And there are some directors if
they did this, if they went to the thing
that's at the heart of the work, it
would be
ghastly or tasteless.
>> Yeah.
>> But it would also be terminal. Like this
is what I'm saying. It would be about
that.
>> That's a great
>> It would be about getting to the point
of the power of revisiting this home of
your childhood, having this catharsis,
and then that's it.
>> He's not interested in that anymore. I
actually think that maybe 20 30 years
ago that may have been sort of enough
>> to get to the place of a catharsis, get
to a place of reckoning, of equating our
my adult self for my younger self. And
here here's a scene where these things
come together.
>> He's looking to get past that cuz he
realizes that honestly he may be
obsessed with childhood, but he knows
that if we're stuck in our childhoods,
we don't move forward. We don't grow.
And he's looking for us to grow. He's
looking for there to be some kind of
transformation so that we can do the
next thing. But also, you know, I think
that one of the beautiful things about
this film is
it really isn't asking for you to read
this movie that way.
>> Because the thing that people are going
to this movie to experience is what is
being disclosed on disclosure day.
>> Sure.
>> It's not a secret
that what we're talking about is the
government covering up some sort of
alien life force presence on Earth.
>> Sure. Um, but there is something really
moving once this once disclosure begins
>> where at least my mind went as you're
watching the footage of these of these
creatures being you know herded,
>> camped,
>> you know, uh, tortured.
>> Yeah.
>> Um,
>> that, you know, all you can think about
is the present.
>> Yeah. Um, and well, I mean, you think
about, you know, 100 years of human
rights abuses,
>> um, being allegorized in the form of or
made metaphor,
uh, in the form of this footage.
>> Mhm. Well, I mean, and and that's why I
think it's relevant. Not it's not just
subtext that we're thinking of Spielberg
and his themes because there is there
isn't in a sense a text of his films
that have taught us how to maybe think
about alien life and how to interact
with them, whether or not they might be
good for us. M maybe the wonderment. To
me, Disclosure Day
>> is like cuz I love ET. ED is perfect,
but it's almost as if it's through the
point of view of Peter Coyote.
>> Elliot,
>> I've been to the forest.
>> Oh, wow. Peter Coyote being the
government agent who is sort of
responsible for I mean, what do we call
the experimentation on is that right? Am
I
>> right? He's looking to sort of, you
know, he's seems like he's the bad guy.
He's the guy with the keys. Like it's
like he's coming in and we don't know
why they might be the bad guy, but they
seem like they're the bad guy, but he's
basically working for the government,
which probably is not going to be on the
side of the aliens, but to do good to
sort of like somehow, you know, help
bridge the gap and be the kind uh um
ambassador that the aliens could could
need. And so therefore, he's the only
one who gets Elliot.
>> He came to me.
He came to me.
Elliot, he came to me, too.
I've been wishing for this since I was
10 years old.
I don't want him to die.
What can we do that we're not already
doing?
>> Right?
>> That's what happens in ET. But to me,
like this disclosure day is like from
like a full adult revisiting this
childhood experience. And in like an ET,
it would be if it was from Peter
Coyote's perspective, there would have
to be a whole other chapter about what
happens next. and what it means to
visit.
>> This Eric, this is really interesting to
me. Um, because what it does is it sort
of I mean I understand what ET has
superficially in relation what it what
it has in common superficially in
relationship to disclosure day, but this
idea that there's this whole wing of
there's a whole character in ET who, you
know, we never talk about the Peter
Peter Coyote character at all. Yeah. And
yet he is crucial
>> to our the calming of our nerves because
I remember, you know, one of the things
that was most upsetting about ET
>> um was that passage where he shows up
>> and the experiments start happening,
>> you know, and you see Elliot, you know,
you're I'm crying when he's you're
killing him.
>> You can't get a fault of blood pressure
on the creature. You look like you're
screaming. You can't break a stone like
that.
How's he doing? How's this guy doing?
I'm hooked on
>> and you know I'm like sitting in my seat
like
that.
>> Yeah.
>> So, um
>> and he's not believed
>> and he's and nobody right. That's the
other thing is like you know children
are here to be seen not heard or
whatever that I mean the our
understanding as kids that that couldn't
possibly be true because
>> we have been watching this entire movie
from Elliot's perspective.
>> We know this is real
>> and we know this is real.
>> Um
>> and Peter K is the only one who knows it
who believes him and so have an adult
believe you as a kid who's seen
something improbable is transformative.
H.
>> But his being here is a miracle, Elliot.
>> It's a miracle.
And you did the best that anybody could
do.
I'm glad he met you first.
And now like we're past that. Like this
is a film where
>> Yeah, I already I we tried this.
>> We tried that. we reacted to it, but no,
we've actually done something so awful
in response to that. We actually did
something just sort of unforgivable to
it to this. Um, and so I feel like
that's important. I feel like it's
important that we carry that in because
we know
>> we know the pure reaction that we could
have like we start with like pure
wonderment basically in uh close
encounters and like sort of like bowing
to the wonder of the unknown. And those
are and that's historically accurate too
like that wonderment that may have come
from in that existed still somehow in
the mid70s but now we're in a moment
where we can relate this to the life the
world that we're in. The idea that like
none of us think that if some foreign
entity came into our world right now
that we would handle it with any kind of
grace or acceptance. Well, this is the
government's excuse for never telling us
is what we we
>> Well, I mean, you know, some of it is
just targeted, you know, projected
narcissism on
>> Yes.
>> on the part of like,
>> you know, you know, decades of of of
federal governmenting, but it's
basically that we are we are the sort of
prime story in the galaxy
>> and there is no there is no other. It's
just us. Mhm.
>> But I want to stay with Close Encounters
for a minute because, you know, I love
what you said about the sort of wonder
the of of the possibility of this
extraordinary event happening, which
essentially in the world of that movie
is, you know, visitors from outer space
coming to us.
>> Yeah.
>> And nobody's scared. Everybody's just
interact, right? There are people coming
to watch the fireworks of these UFOs
every night and they just come visit and
do a light show.
>> Mhm.
>> Um I don't know. There's just some like
we start out in Spielberg being truly
innocent.
>> Yes.
>> Uh of these of these visitations,
>> right? And so I guess my point is that
50 years later we're going to visit the
idea that we've been visited before
>> in order to even like think about the
fact that this has been happening for 70
years or so. I'm thinking about the
visitations of close encounters like
it's almost an historical event within
the world of
>> we know they came.
>> We know they came
>> and we know that there's nice there's
there's really productive ways of
responding to that. And obviously what
comes with that is the idea of opening
yourself opening yourself to the
unknown. opening yourself to something
that you can't understand. And that's
something as humans we're incredibly bad
at. We're very, very bad at being open
and vulnerable and listening. And so
he's positing we didn't respond that
way. We responded in the worst possible
way and then we've hid it from everyone
to prevent them from having this
experience of wonderment, but also to
hide it from them because they're not
going to handle it well. I kind of want
to think about what you're saying about
being open and vulnerable and listening
because this to me is the entire
our entire relationship to this man,
right? To in his film making
>> which is about
him opening us up and us being open to
his ideas and his wonder and and
instilling that in us. But I think, you
know, I don't know. I just sort of want
to think more holistically about what
the Steven Spielberg project ultimately
is with Disclosure Day in mind, but just
thinking about like, you know,
>> 50 plus years. And
I'm really interested in thinking about
what it's meant to have this person in
our lives for you and me our whole
lives.
>> But also
what it means to have had him
work as much as he's worked cuz you know
you talked before about him
you rejecting him for being manipul. you
recognized in him this
um gift, skill,
>> sure,
>> curse of manipulation
>> and it didn't work for you. Um and I
want to I want to sort of complicate
>> that a little bit by bringing into the
room
>> Yeah.
>> Mr. William Goldman.
>> Um one of our great screenwriters and
one of the great thinkers about the
movies period. Um he has a chapter in
one of his you know essential books um
Adventures in the Screen Trade.
>> Um this is the guy who wrote The
Princess Bride and Misery and All the
President's Men and Butch Cassidy and
the Sundance Kid. Um and he is he spends
a few moments to think about what George
Lucas and Steven Spielberg represent.
And he this book came out in 1983. So it
comes out, Goldman's already seen ET,
which comes out in ' 82. And he's
basically trying to summarize
what it is that Spielberg and Lucas are
doing that feels important. And it's
important like he's conjoining Spielberg
and Lucas because they're friends. They
work together a lot. And the culmination
of that friendship at that point had
been
>> Raiders of the Lost Arc, right, which
Lucas wrote and Spielberg directed. So I
should also say um these are comic book
movies to William Goldman.
>> That is his description of them.
>> These are movies that satisfy some
kidlike need to have a tidy story and he
classifies them not poratively
as comic book movies. So here are the
four qualities that sort of make what it
is Spielberg is doing um comic booklike
in their nature. Generally, only bad
guys die. This is number one. And if a
good guy does kick, he does it
heroically. Number two, there tends to
be a lack of resonance. Like the popcorn
you're munching, it's not meant to last.
Number three, the movie turns in on
itself. Its reference points tend to be
other movies. If, for example, there had
been no Saturday afternoon serals, there
would have been no frame for Raiders of
the Lost Art. It's true. Can't deny it.
It's number four. that I'm like Mr.
Coleman.
>> But he's not wrong. And probably, this
is number four, and probably most
important, the comic book movie doesn't
have a great deal to do with life as it
exists, as we know it to be. Rather, it
deals with life as we would prefer it to
be safer that way.
Your thoughts?
Uh, well, I think thinking about what he
was referencing in terms of those films,
I think that's fair in terms of Star
Wars. It's totally fair. I think it's
fair for Raiders Lost Arc.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, like this is a this is a this
is a a closed off world. It's not true
for ET. I don't think it is.
>> He loved ET, by the way. He was
convinced at that point it was going to
win best picture.
>> That should well,
but I don't I don't So, I I think that's
where things start to emerge. I also
think that's not necessarily true of
Jaws. Not true with Jaws.
>> No, Jaws is like you're carrying stuff
into that movie and you're taking it
away that are there there's a porousness
and that's what happened culturally with
that.
>> Also close encounters, right?
>> Close Encounters also. Yeah. No, I don't
think that's I think it's really about
Raiders Lost Arc and Star Wars.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> That I feel like that's what he's really
referencing.
>> But I think though I want to be fair to
his observation because
>> it still fundamentally holds, right? I
mean, what he's thinking about in a lot
of ways is a kind of um
it's not quite nostalgia,
>> but it but it's bound up in nostalgia.
There is a kind of I mean, just him
saying safer that way, right?
>> In point number four, with respect to
life as it's lived versus how we'd
prefer it to be,
>> right? Um, I think that there's I think
that there's a sort of there's a there's
a zone between those two worlds where
>> there's a tension between the two. And I
think what Spielberg is actually great
at is the tension between life at is as
it's being lived and life as you wish it
could be,
>> right? And a lot of his characters exist
in the zone between the the idyllic and
the dysfunctional.
>> That is true. That is very true. Um and
I think that as time has gone on,
he's more aware of the problem.
>> This is what I want to talk about. Yes.
Which is what's interesting, right? I
feel like he's more aware of that
problem. And that's why I think it was
interesting when he started getting into
realist historical dramas like a saving
private Ryan which I think is why him
getting into that terrain and bringing
some of this some of these tricks some
of the storytelling um uh tendencies
that he has were not up to the task cuz
it kind of could simplify reality. Great
use of tricks is a good
>> right simplifying and historical reality
through this kind of like you know big
screen cinematic storytelling devices.
Um which I think is a fair criticism. It
doesn't mean that that film's not
incredible, but like I think it's fair
to sort of say now you've gone into this
terrain. Wait a second. Schindler's
List, Saving Private Ryan, we're not
just in the in the realm of movies are
amazing. Wow. You know,
But that's where I think it starts
getting complicated. And that's why it's
interesting to me the last 20 25 years
>> when he's getting into back into
historical or contemporary stories
>> how much more complicated they are and
how much more they are seeming to be in
conversation with reality.
>> So let's talk about these like like last
25 26 years.
>> Yeah. Because I think what we both agree
on is that his last 25 or 26 years
are as good and in some ways better than
his first 25 or 26.
>> I wouldn't necessarily say that in terms
of batting average, but in terms of
>> the the great the great ones are as good
as anything and I think more
interesting. And I think
>> I'm always interested in artists as they
age.
And I think that we too often dwell on
the younger artists and we dwell on the
kind of first moments of brilliance and
you could certainly do that with
Spielberg. You could certainly say his
greatest film is Jaws best film where I
see it fair but it's way more
interesting when a artist gets a chance
to stay in his game and evolve and
change and mature and I think that we
there's kind of like very there's hardly
any example of quite like this. I mean,
Scorsesei is also of of, you know, which
is interesting because they're
contemporaries, um, but kind of
continuing to evolve and become a
different artist while also being the
same guy. And I think Disclosure Day is
like an incredible opportunity because
of the themes involved.
>> Yeah. I mean, one of the things that I
really love about
what that house is doing in Disclosure
Day is that it is making explicit a
thing that is such a huge part of the
Steven Spielberg project, which is what
it means to have a home and what it
means to no longer have one or be
displaced from it. Um, and home can be
something as simple as like an actual
house. Um, the way it is in uh the way
it is here,
but it can also be conceptual, right?
Like what does it mean? What happens?
What is the real chaos in War of the
Worlds, for instance? It's that you've
got millions of people like suddenly
homeless. Yeah.
>> And like, you know, migrating from point
A to point who knows. Mhm.
>> Um, Westside Story is a movie about
people fighting over a neighborhood and
as it is being destroyed.
>> Sure.
>> Um,
>> and it's it's a hard fought neighborhood
too cuz they had come from somewhere
else.
>> Right. Exactly. One that they had made,
>> right? Yeah. And I mean, just to be
clear about Westside Story, the
achievement of that is it is it is
dialing way up
>> these themes that are like loosely
touched upon in the original musical.
Um, and it's sort of saying I mean, you
know, his Steven Spielberg and Tony
Kushner's Westside Story is,
>> you know, like an explicitly political
document, right? Yeah.
>> Um, about displacement, right, and
gentrification.
>> Um, I was trying to think of a
precedent, you know, in the movies for
someone, you know, Spielberg is going to
be 80 this year.
>> Yeah.
And like I just feel like there is such
life
coming out of this work and it's been
true from you know from just the from
the from the
town hall meeting in Jaws right where
you know everybody comes together to
complain about how this is going to ruin
business if you close the beach.
>> Yeah. um to the America sequence in
Westside Story and I don't know I just
it it still matters to him so much.
>> Imagine if he had made Westside Story in
the 70s. It would be a totally different
film.
>> A totally different movie.
>> It would have a different perspective.
It would have a different look. The fact
that those 70s films are such 70s
American films is what's so great about
them. And now the fact that these films
are this American 21st century
development um makes them in some ways
you could say aesthetically here and
there I'm not as interested in this or
that
>> but what he's doing in terms of the
stories he's telling and how he's
telling them and the perspective that
they have is even more interesting I
think um because there is like something
like the Fableman's which is from a
child's point of view and yet we all
know that it's from an older man's point
of view that he's kind of seeing through
this younger self. You can really only
do that if you're working in your in
your 70s.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh so in anyway to get back to your
point, in some ways this might be his
best era. I can see that.
>> I mean I think I mean I think there's
like a pocket that we should like think
about here which is this collaboration
with Tony Kushner.
>> Yes.
>> I mean they've made four movies
together. Um, starting with Munich and
then Lincoln and then uh Westside Story
and then the Fablemans.
>> Yeah.
>> And
in honor of you, Eric, I had I mean,
it's funny. Every time I every time I
know I'm going to talk to you about
there's a possibility that we talk about
Stephen Spielberg, I watch Munich again.
Um, I think, you know, Munich is the
first in this in this relationship. Tony
Kushner, of course, being one of our
great American artists. He's a
playwright. He is a, you know, a
political activist. Um, he's a humanist
the way Spielberg is, but like with much
much more um much more emphatically
humanist.
>> Yeah.
>> Um,
>> and these two are the two two of the
least likely people
>> absolutely
>> you would ever think would be capable of
making movies together.
>> Wasn't a screenwriter like He'd never
written a movie before
>> to write a script.
>> So I watched Munich last night again and
I know I mean I know that you love it.
>> Yeah,
>> I do too. But I you know
that movie is so strong
>> and it is so morally pungent. Um.
>> Mhm.
>> This is a movie about um
the Israeli government's response to the
assassination
of 11 Israeli athletes during the Munich
Games in 197 1972.
>> And it
moviewise is a caper movie.
>> Yep. in which a rag tag crew comes
together
>> to hunt down the Palestinians who were
involved in the assassinations who are
hiding in Europe all over Europe. So,
the crew, you know, they're debating
each murder um and what it's going to
mean, what it means to to do it, but
they're also as they as they
enact this this this mission thinking
about what it means and are they even
are they even being told the truth
>> about what it is they've been assembled
to do by the Israeli government.
>> Yeah. arguably his best film
>> but also has so many things going on in
it. Yeah.
>> That we are talking about. That's what's
so like
>> you mean in the present.
>> No no no thematically.
>> Theatically I think I think that's why I
think it's the pivot film. Obviously
working with Kushner is a pivot, but
also the idea of approaching history and
seeing it from multiple angles,
complicating it, having it be about the
way that we as people deal with revenge
and deal with reacting to to trauma and
to to to violence. I mean the sequence
with the phone.
>> I turn it on.
He picks up the phone, turns on the red
light,
then take up the key, insert it, and
turn.
>> Yeah.
>> Um where basically there's a plan to
have the telephone ringing as a trigger
and the man who's the target who they're
supposed to blow up his house. Um he
answers the phone, they confirm it's
him, and that's supposed to set things
in motion. What happens is his daughter
is home that day and she's involved. And
so
>> she's like 12.
>> Yeah. 12.
>> Hello.
>> And so what happens then is
>> Some people, some members of the team
are aware of this more than others. And
so basically Eric Bana has to run from
one car to the other to alert them to
not pull to not detonate because of the
because of the girl. And you're
basically cross cutting between what's
going on in the apartment with this car,
that car.
>> And yes, it's incredible film making.
It's incredibly tense. It's kind of like
almost the definition of how to make a
suspenseful suspenseful action sequence
happen. But it's about something. It's
about a lot more. It's not just about,
you know, what's going to happen. Will
the house blow up? Will the girl die?
>> It's more like what are we doing here?
Like what is what is any of this?
>> Why is any of this happening?
>> Yeah. And that kind of infuses the
entire film which I think then kind of
echoes beyond the story of the film
itself and into geopolitical realities
and what we do as uh society but also as
men in particular
>> you know in confronted with uh you know
with uh
>> murder betrayal um principles ideology
etc. So to me, the idea of kind of
getting inside what he's so good at,
which is telling a story with images and
through drama,
kind of changes for me with that film
because it's not um these are not
sequences where you are really left with
a clear sense of what should happen or
what is right and what is wrong because
you've got your protagonists who are
doing murderous acts and you're they're
very visceral murder.
death in this movie.
>> Um, it's funny. I talked to Tony Kushner
to talk to Steven Spielberg,
>> and
you know, Kushner was worried about
whether Spielberg
um
would would be willing to go as far as
Kushner's screenplay wanted him to go
>> in terms of the violence, in terms of
the politics.
>> Yeah. And you know, Kushner just said,
"Yeah, I mean, he was he was ready." But
what's interesting is how sort of
the same person who makes that that
sequence in, you know, the famous
sequence in Readers,
you know, the the gun and the knife,
right?
>> Yeah.
>> This is a totally different director in
some ways.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. Yep.
>> This is a person who is really thinking
about the the human and moral
consequences of a death.
>> Yep.
>> And there is no death for comedy here.
>> There is every death is a tragedy.
>> Every near death is a tragedy.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and I don't know. I feel like you you
need I don't know if this is I don't I'm
going to say this so it's just just not
going to be true. But I mean, I think
that there's a world in which
this person needed to make a Raiders of
the Lost Arc in order to make a Munich.
>> Absolutely. And listen, you look at any
sequence in Raiders of the Lost Arc in
terms of just cinematic language and
it's as good as anything. Like it's it's
incredible. But what is beneath it?
What's behind it? What's the meaning of
it all to me? Like what what happened is
and happened to me too. So again, it's
not so much like Spielberg grew up. I
grew up more than anything and I think I
started interpreting his films
differently. But I do think that there's
>> you can make me feel something
>> and you feel you have the power like
nobody is better at making me feel
something as he is.
>> I don't have to feel good about you
making me feel something. He's making me
feel things.
>> I feel like now for quite some time what
he's making me feel is way more
complicated.
>> There's no direct
>> press a button make me cry. press a
button, make me scared. It's much more
like, what did I just feel? What do I do
with this feeling? That is on another
level.
>> Okay.
Um,
yeah. I don't know. He's just I
I don't know. I just I I love him. I
don't know. I don't know.
Uh, all right. We're We're done. Um, we
Spielberg.
>> We Spielberg. I have something that I
may have referenced,
but uh,
>> oh my.
>> Something I still have. Show and tell.
Show and tell.
>> You're not taking this from me.
>> Oh,
>> this is my
>> This is
>> This is what I slept with.
>> Oh my god.
>> For three years until until junior high.
>> This is wild. This is
>> I had one of these.
>> You had one of these, too?
>> Oh my god. I This is a recovered memory.
You know, there was a moment in when I
was writing about him and like writing
about the experiences of other people
experiencing him like when I would go
out into the world with with Steven
Spielberg.
>> And to myself, I described him as like a
walking recovered memory.
>> That
>> what where did what happened to yours?
>> I don't know. Mine's not going anywhere.
>> Oh my god.
>> Oh my god. Anyway, that is
>> I mean, we've Spielberg has been with us
for a very long time.
>> I mean I mean he'll be with me
>> to the grave,
>> but probably beyond the grave, honestly.
Like all those memories are just going
to go out into somebody else's
situation.
>> Um Eric, thanks for doing this.
>> Thank you, Wesley.
Can I?
>> Yeah, please.
>> I mean,
oh my god, I can't believe you still
have it.
>> Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah.
>> My mom didn't really am sentimental.
>> I really wonder. My mother, she was the
best mom ever, but she didn't h have any
problem being like,
>> getting rid of [__] You got five
minutes.
This is going in the dumpster.